## Introduction {.page_break_before}

Gene expression profiles are widely used to classify samples or patients into relevant groups or categories, both preclinically [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009926; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa150] and clinically [@doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.18.1370; @doi:10/bp4rtw].
To extract informative gene features and to perform classification, a diverse array of algorithms exist, and different algorithms perform well across varying datasets and tasks [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009926].
Even within a given model class, multiple optimization methods can often be applied to find well-performing model parameters or to optimize a model's loss function.
One commonly used example is logistic regression.
The widely used scikit-learn Python package for machine learning [@url:https://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html] provides two modules for fitting logistic regression classifiers: `LogisticRegression`, which uses the `liblinear` coordinate descent method [@url:https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v9/fan08a.html] to find parameters that optimize the logistic loss function, and `SGDClassifier`, which uses stochastic gradient descent [@online-learning] to optimize the same loss function.

Using scikit-learn, we compared the `liblinear` (coordinate descent) and SGD optimization techniques for prediction of driver mutation status in tumor samples, across a wide variety of genes implicated in cancer initiation and development [@doi:10.1126/science.1235122].
We applied LASSO (L1-regularized) logistic regression, and tuned the strength of the regularization to compare model selection between optimizers.
We found that across a variety of models (i.e. varying regularization strengths), the training dynamics of the optimizers were considerably different: models fit using `liblinear` tended to perform best at fairly high regularization strengths (100-1000 nonzero features in the model) and overfit easily with low regularization strengths.
On the other hand, after tuning the learning rate, models fit using SGD tended to perform well across both higher and lower regularization strengths, and overfitting was less common.

Our results caution against viewing optimizer choice as a "black box" component of machine learning modeling.
The observation that LASSO logistic regression models fit using SGD tended to perform well for low levels of regularization, across diverse driver genes, runs counter to conventional wisdom in machine learning for high-dimensional data which generally states that explicit regularization and/or feature selection is necessary.
Comparing optimizers or model implementations directly is rare in applications of machine learning for genomics, and our work shows that this choice can affect generalization and interpretation properties of the model significantly.
Based on our results, we recommend considering the appropriate optimization approach carefully based on the goals of each individual analysis.


## Methods {.page_break_before}

### Data download and preprocessing

To generate binary mutated/non-mutated gene labels for our machine learning model, we used mutation calls for TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas samples from MC3 [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2018.03.002] and copy number threshold calls from GISTIC2.0 [@doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-4-r41].
MC3 mutation calls were downloaded from the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) of the National Cancer Institute, at <https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-data/publications/pancanatlas>.
Thresholded copy number calls are from an older version of the GDC data and are available here: <https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/TCGA_PanCanAtlas_Copy_Number_Data/6144122>.
We removed hypermutated samples, defined as two or more standard deviations above the mean non-silent somatic mutation count, from our dataset to reduce the number of false positives (i.e., non-driver mutations).
Any sample with either a non-silent somatic variant or a copy number variation (copy number gain in the target gene for oncogenes and copy number loss in the target gene for tumor suppressor genes) was included in the positive set; all remaining samples were considered negative for mutation in the target gene.

RNA sequencing data for TCGA was downloaded from GDC at the same link provided above for the Pan-Cancer Atlas.
We discarded non-protein-coding genes and genes that failed to map, and removed tumors that were measured from multiple sites.
After filtering to remove hypermutated samples and taking the intersection of samples with both mutation and gene expression data, 9074 total TCGA samples remained.

### Cancer gene set construction

In order to study mutation status classification for a diverse set of cancer driver genes, we started with the set of 125 frequently altered genes from Vogelstein et al. [@doi:10.1126/science.1235122] (all genes from Table S2A).
For each target gene, in order to ensure that the training dataset was reasonably balanced (i.e., that there would be enough mutated samples to train an effective classifier), we included only cancer types with at least 15 mutated samples and at least 5% mutated samples, which we refer to here as "valid" cancer types.
In some cases, this resulted in genes with no valid cancer types, which we dropped from the analysis.
Out of the 125 genes originally listed in the Vogelstein et al. cancer gene set, we retained 84 target genes after filtering for valid cancer types.

### Classifier setup and optimizer comparison details

We trained logistic regression classifiers to predict whether or not a given sample had a mutational event in a given target gene using gene expression features as explanatory variables.
Based on our previous work, gene expression is generally effective for this problem across many target genes, although other -omics types can be equally effective in many cases [@doi:10.1186/s13059-022-02705-y].
Our model was trained on gene expression data (X) to predict mutation presence or absence (y) in a target gene.
To control for varying mutation burden per sample and to adjust for potential cancer type-specific expression patterns, we included one-hot encoded cancer type and log~10~(sample mutation count) in the model as covariates.
Since gene expression datasets tend to have many dimensions and comparatively few samples, we used a LASSO penalty to perform feature selection [@doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.tb02080.x].
LASSO logistic regression has the advantage of generating sparse models (some or most coefficients are 0), as well as having a single tunable hyperparameter which can be easily interpreted as an indicator of regularization strength, or model complexity.

To compare model selection across optimizers, we first split the "valid" cancer types into train (75%) and test (25%) sets.
We then split the training data into "subtrain" (66% of the training set) data to train the model on, and "holdout" (33% of the training set) data to perform model selection, i.e. to use to select the best-performing regularization parameter, and the best-performing learning rate for SGD in the cases where multiple learning rates were considered.
In each case, these splits were stratified by cancer type, i.e. each split had as close as possible to equal proportions of each cancer type included in the dataset for the given driver gene.

### LASSO parameter range selection and comparison between optimizers

The scikit-learn implementations of coordinate descent (in `liblinear`/`LogisticRegression`) and stochastic gradient descent (in `SGDClassifier`) use slightly different parameterizations of the LASSO regularization strength parameter. `liblinear`'s logistic regression solver optimizes the following loss function:

$$\hat{w} = \text{argmin}_{w} \ (C \cdot \ell(X, y; w)) + ||w||_1$$

where $\ell(X, y; w)$ denotes the negative log-likelihood of the observed data $(X, y)$ given a particular choice of feature weights $w$.`SGDClassifier` optimizes the following loss function:

$$\hat{w} = \text{argmin}_{w} \ \ell(X, y; w) + \alpha ||w||_1$$

<!--_ -->

which is equivalent with the exception of the LASSO parameter which is formulated slightly differently, as $\alpha = \frac{1}{C}$.
The result of this slight difference in parameterization is that `liblinear` $C$ values vary inversely with regularization strength (higher values = less regularization, or greater model complexity) and `SGDClassifier` $\alpha$ values vary directly with regularization strength (lower values = less regularization, or greater model complexity).

For the `liblinear` optimizer, we trained models using $C$ values evenly spaced on a logarithmic scale between (10^-3^, 10^7^); i.e. the output of `numpy.logspace(-3, 7, 21)`.
For the SGD optimizer, we trained models using the inverse range of $\alpha$ values between (10^-7^, 10^3^), or `numpy.logspace(-7, 3, 21)`.
These hyperparameter ranges were intended to give evenly distributed coverage across genes that included "underfit" models (predicting only the mean or using very few features, poor performance on all datasets), "overfit" models (performing perfectly on training data but comparatively poorly on cross-validation and test data), and a wide variety of models in between that typically included the best fits to the cross-validation and test data.

For ease of visual comparison in our figures, we plot the SGD $\alpha$ parameter directly, and the `liblinear` $C$ parameter inversely (i.e. $\frac{1}{C}$).
This orients the x-axes of the relevant plots in the same direction: lower values represent lower regularization strength or higher model complexity, and higher values represent higher regularization strength or lower model complexity, for both optimizers.

### SGD learning rate selection

scikit-learn's `SGDClassifier` provides four built-in approaches to learning rate scheduling: `constant` (a single, constant learning rate), `optimal` (a learning rate with an initial value selected using a heuristic based on the regularization parameter and the data loss, that decreases across epochs), `invscaling` (a learning rate that decreases exponentially by epoch), and `adaptive` (a learning rate that starts at a constant value, which is divided by 5 each time the training loss fails to decrease for 5 straight epochs).
The `optimal` learning rate schedule is used by default.

When we compared these four approaches, we used a constant learning rate of 0.0005, and an initial learning rate of 0.1 for the `adaptive` and `invscaling` schedules.
We also tested a fifth approach that we called "`constant_search`", in which we tested a range of constant learning rates in a grid search on a validation dataset, then evaluated the model on the test data using the best-performing constant learning rate by validation AUPR.
For the grid search, we used the following range of constant learning rates: {0.000005, 0.00001, 0.00005, 0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.01}.
Unless otherwise specified, results for SGD in the main paper figures used the `constant_search` approach, which performed the best in our comparison between schedulers.


## Results {.page_break_before}

### `liblinear` and SGD LASSO models perform comparably, but `liblinear` is prone to overfitting

For each of the 125 driver genes from the Vogelstein et al. 2013 paper, we trained models to predict mutation status (presence or absence) from RNA-seq data, derived from the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas.
For each optimizer, we trained LASSO logistic regression models across a variety of regularization parameters (see Methods for parameter range details), for 4 cross-validation splits x 2 replicates (random seeds) for a total of 8 different models per parameter.
Cross-validation splits were stratified by cancer type.

Previous work has shown that pan-cancer classifiers of Ras mutation status are accurate and biologically informative [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.046].
We first evaluated models for KRAS mutation prediction.
As model complexity increases (more nonzero coefficients) for the `liblinear` optimizer, we observed that performance increases then decreases, corresponding to overfitting for high model complexities/numbers of nonzero coefficients (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}A).
On the other hand, for the SGD optimizer, we observed consistent performance as model complexity increases, with models having no nonzero coefficients performing comparably to the best (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}B).
In this case, top performance for SGD (a regularization parameter of 10^-1^) is slightly better than top performance for `liblinear` (a regularization parameter of 1 / 3.16 x 10^2^): we observed a mean test AUPR of 0.722 for SGD vs. mean AUPR of 0.692 for `liblinear`.

To determine how relative performance trends with `liblinear` tend to compare across the genes in the Vogelstein dataset at large, we looked at the difference in performance between optimizers for the best-performing models for each gene (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}C).
The distribution is centered around 0 and more or less symmetrical, suggesting that across the gene set, `liblinear` and SGD tend to perform comparably to one another.
We saw that for 52/84 genes, performance for the best-performing model was better using SGD than `liblinear`, and for the other 32 genes performance was better using `liblinear`.
In order to quantify whether the overfitting tendencies (or lack thereof) also hold across the gene set, we plotted the difference in performance between the best-performing model and the largest (least regularized) model; classifiers with a large difference in performance exhibit strong overfitting, and classifiers with a small difference in performance do not overfit (Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}D).
For SGD, the least regularized models tend to perform comparably to the best-performing models, whereas for `liblinear` the distribution is wider suggesting that overfitting is more common.

![
**A.** Performance vs. inverse regularization parameter for KRAS mutation status prediction, using the `liblinear` coordinate descent optimizer. Dotted lines indicate top performance value of the opposite optimizer.
**B.** Performance vs. regularization parameter for KRAS mutation status prediction, using the SGD optimizer. "Holdout" dataset is used for SGD learning rate selection, "test" data is completely held out from model selection and used for evaluation.
**C.** Distribution of performance difference between best-performing model for `liblinear` and SGD optimizers, across all 84 genes in Vogelstein driver gene set. Positive numbers on the x-axis indicate better performance using `liblinear`, and negative numbers indicate better performance using SGD.
**D.** Distribution of performance difference between best-performing model and largest (least regularized) model, for `liblinear` and SGD, across all 84 genes. Smaller numbers on the y-axis indicate less overfitting, and larger numbers indicate more overfitting.
](images/figure_1.png){#fig:optimizer_compare_mutations width="100%"}

### SGD is sensitive to learning rate selection

The SGD results shown in Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations} select the best-performing learning rate using a grid search on the holdout dataset, independently for each regularization parameter.
We also compared against other learning rate scheduling approaches implemented in scikit-learn (see Methods for implementation details and grid search specifications).
For KRAS mutation prediction, we observed that the choice of initial learning rate and scheduling approach affects performance significantly, and other approaches to selecting the learning rate performed poorly relative to `liblinear` (black dotted lines in Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}) and to the grid search.
We did not observe an improvement in performance over `liblinear` or the grid search for learning rate schedulers that decrease across epochs (Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}A, C, and D), nor did we see comparable performance when we selected a single constant learning rate for all levels of regularization without the preceding grid search (Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}B).
Notably, scikit-learn's default "optimal" learning rate schedule performed relatively poorly for this problem, suggesting that tuning the learning rate and selecting a well-performing scheduler is a critical component of applying SGD successfully for this problem (Figure {@fig:sgd_lr_schedulers}D).
We observed similar trends across all genes in the Vogelstein gene set, with other learning rate scheduling approaches performing poorly in aggregate relative to both `liblinear` and SGD with the learning rate grid search (Supplementary Figure TODO).

![
**A.** Performance vs. regularization parameter for KRAS mutation prediction, using SGD optimizer with adaptive learning rate scheduler. Dotted line indicates top performance value using `liblinear`, from Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}A.
**B.** Performance vs. regularization parameter, using SGD optimizer with constant learning rate scheduler and a learning rate of 0.0005.
**C.** Performance vs. regularization parameter, using SGD optimizer with inverse scaling learning rate scheduler.
**D.** Performance vs. regularization parameter, using SGD optimizer with "optimal" learning rate scheduler.
](images/figure_2.png){#fig:sgd_lr_schedulers width="100%"}

### SGD and `liblinear` result in different models, with varying loss dynamics

We sought to determine whether there was a difference in the sparsity of the models resulting from the different optimization schemes.
In general across all genes, the best-performing SGD models mostly tend to have many nonzero coefficients, but with a distinct positive tail, sometimes having few nonzero coefficients.
By contrast, the `liblinear` models are generally sparser with fewer than 2500 nonzero coefficients, out of ~16100 total input features, and a much narrower tail (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}A).
The sum of the coefficient magnitudes, however, tends to be smaller on average across all levels of regularization for SGD than for `liblinear` (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}B).
These results suggest that the models fit by `liblinear` and SGD navigate the tradeoff between bias and variance in slightly different ways: `liblinear` tends to produce sparser models (more zero coefficients) as regularization increases, but SGD coefficients tend to have smaller overall magnitudes as regularization increases.

We also compared the components of the loss function across different levels of regularization between optimizers.
The LASSO logistic regression loss function can be broken down into a data-dependent component (the log-loss) and a parameter magnitude dependent component (the L1 penalty), which are added to get the total loss that is minimized by each optimizer; see Methods for additional details.
As regularization strength decreases for `liblinear`, the data loss collapses to near 0, and the L1 penalty dominates the overall loss (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}C).
For SGD, on the other hand, the data loss decreases slightly as regularization strength decreases but remains relatively high (Figure {@fig:optimizer_coefs}D).
Other SGD learning rate schedules have similar loss curves to the `liblinear` results, although this does not result in improved classification performance (Supplementary Figure TODO).

![
**A.** Distribution across genes of the number of nonzero coefficients included in best-performing LASSO logistic regression models. Violin plot density estimations are clipped at the ends of the observed data range, and boxes show the median/IQR.
**B.** Distribution across genes of the sum of model coefficient weights for best-performing LASSO logistic regression models.
**C.** Decomposition of loss function for models fit using `liblinear` across regularization levels.
**D.** Decomposition of loss function for models fit using SGD across regularization levels.
](images/figure_3.png){#fig:optimizer_coefs width="100%"}


## Discussion {.page_break_before}

Our results suggest that even for the same model, LASSO logistic regression, optimizer choice can affect model selection and performance.
Existing gene expression prediction benchmarks and pipelines typically use a single model implementation (and thus a single optimizer).
To our knowledge, the phenomenon we observed with SGD has not been documented in other applications of ML to genomic or transcriptomic data.
In the broader machine learning research community, however, similar patterns have been observed for both linear models and deep neural networks (e.g. [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1907378117; @arxiv:1611.03530]).
This is often termed "benign overfitting": the idea that "overfit" models, in the sense that they fit the training data perfectly and perform worse on the test data, can still outperform models that do not fit the training data as well or that have stronger explicit regularization.
Benign overfitting has been observed with, and attributed to, optimization using SGD, which is thought to provide a form of implicit regularization [@doi:10.1145/3446776; @url:http://proceedings.mlr.press/v134/zou21a.html].

We recommend thinking critically about optimizer choice, but this can be challenging for users that are inexperienced with machine learning or unfamiliar with how certain models are fit under the hood.
For example, R's `glmnet` package uses a cyclical coordinate descent algorithm to fit logistic regression models [@doi:10.18637/jss.v033.i01], which would presumably behave similarly to `liblinear`, but this is somewhat opaque in the `glmnet` documentation itself.
LASSO logistic regression is a convex optimization problem, meaning there is a single unique optimum of the loss function in contrast to more complex models such as neural networks, but this optimum can be computationally intensive to find in practice and there is no closed-form solution [@l1-logistic-regression].
Increased transparency and documentation in popular machine learning packages with respect to optimization, especially for models that are challenging to fit, would benefit new and unfamiliar users.


Similar to what we see in our SGD-optimized models, there exist other problems in gene expression analysis where using all available features is better than using a subset.
For example, using the full gene set improves correlations between preclinical cancer models and their tissue of origin, as compared to selecting genes based on variability or tissue-specificity [@doi:10.1101/2023.04.11.536431].
On the other hand, when predicting cell line viability from gene expression profiles, selecting features by Pearson correlation improves performance over using all features, similar to our `liblinear` classifiers [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.21.959627].
An avenue of future work for our SGD classifiers would be to interpret the coefficients and compare them systematically to the coefficients found using `liblinear`.
It could be useful to understand if the two optimization methods emphasize the same pathways or functional gene sets, or if there are patterns to which driver mutations perform better with more/fewer nonzero coefficients.


## Data and code availability {.page_break_before}

The data analyzed during this study were previously published as part of the TCGA Pan-Cancer Atlas project [@doi:10.1038/ng.2764], and are available from the NIH NCI Genomic Data Commons (GDC).
The scripts used to download and preprocess the datasets for this study are available at <https://github.com/greenelab/pancancer-evaluation/tree/master/00_process_data>, and the code used to carry out the analyses in this study is available at <https://github.com/greenelab/pancancer-evaluation/tree/master/01_stratified_classification>, both under the open-source BSD 3-clause license.
Equivalent versions of Figure {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}A and {@fig:optimizer_compare_mutations}B for all 84 genes in the Vogelstein et al. 2013 gene set are available on Figshare at <https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.22728644>, under a CC0 license.
This manuscript was written using Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128] and is available on GitHub at <https://github.com/greenelab/optimizer-manuscript> under the CC0-1.0 license.
